Kaa..
Ka…
I don’t know about you, but, this is what
comes to my mind.
This black bird!
What about Kaakka Kaakka?
There was a movie by that name.. I guess in
2000, .. or 2004..
The famous and popular Jothika / Surya pair
star in leading roles in it.
You may be reminded of that movie.. but, for
me, all that came to mind was the trip they
had in that jeep…
He flings the empty can into the open road..
just like that.
And, doesn’t even wear a seatbelt.
Neither of them does!
That is what sticks in my mind!
But, .. Kaakka Kaakka also reminds us perhaps
of this.
The Kandhar Shashti Kavacham.
Kutthu Kutthu Koorvadivelaal, Pattru Pattru
Pagalavan Thanaleri.
Thanaleri Thanaleri Thanaladhuvaaga, Vidu
Vidu Velai Verundadhu Oda..
Thanal Eri.
The burning.
That burning is what we are going to talk
about.
Let’s meet!
Namaste!
Four hundred and thirtytwo is about Burnout.
The destruction that happens when you burn
yourselves out.
I hear there is a term in Japanese, just for
this.
We have encountered it earlier too.
Karoshi.
Death from overworking.
They would work with a vengeance, it seems.
Work when they don’t know what else to do.
Eighty hour work weeks, hundred hour work
weeks..
The government had to bring a law, limiting
the number of hours.
“You cannot work more than these many hours
at the office!”
It became such a large problem.
An epidemic of sorts!
And when was this?!
Not last year!
Not after Facebook became popular!
This has been around since the 1970s!
The government tried to work with the people,
they brought laws, .. and counsellors..
About topics like how to manage workload,
how to limit workhours, and aspirations..
understand their aspirations and work one
on one.
Karoshi!
Death by overworking!
What is the definition of Burnout?
If you start googling for it, roughly, this
is what it will be described as.
Burnout is a syndrome resulting from chronic
workplace stress that has not been successfully
managed.
Three important keywords there — chronic,
stress, and managed.
It becomes large, over time..
It is about stress.
Unmanageable difficulties.
Unmanageable pressure.
Workplace stress.
And, it has not been successfully managed.
What does that mean?
Probably not overcome.
But, compromised.
I accustom myself to that.
I understand that this is how it is going
to be.
And, I adjust.
When I don’t adjust, when I am not able
to adjust, and when it builds up gradually
over time, .. that chronic workplace stress..
That’s burnout!
How do you identify?
What is Burnout?
What are the symptoms?
Those tell tale signs they talk about?
It seems there are three tell-tale signs.
The first one, you get UTTERLY EXHAUSTED!
Monday morning blues… imagine that happening
every day, every hour, you are DRAGGING yourself
to work!
You simply don’t have the energy..
like a one-percent battery..
You can’t do anything really..
You feel like.., leaden-footed.
Utter Exhaustion.
Not physical exhaustion.
Mental, emotional exhaustion.
And, when we bring up the topic of emotions,
“Why are you so moody today?
Why are you angry today?”
Beyond all this… emotional numbness.
An inability to feel any kind of emotion.
I cannot be happy.
I cannot be unhappy.
I am not able to bear that emotion.
I am detached.
I don’t seem connected.
We need SOME emotion, we are told.
That is natural human tendency, they say.
If you don’t have that, if a vacuum supplants
it, that is the second telltale sign.
And of course, there is a third level.
After exhaustion and emotional numbness, you
feel simply insignificant.
In this universe.
In this company.
In this team.
Does anybody even care I exist?
If a bus runs over me tomorrow, will anybody
even notice?
Am I contributing anything meaningful, significant…?
What am I?
That utter insignificance.
I am incompetent, I am simply not doing anything
meaningful — that sort of feeling.
The three stages, the three symptoms that
you are burning out!
Why does this fatigue come, after all?
The Man of the Stone Ages WORKED.
Before the Industrial Revolution, people sweated
it out.
Even after the Industrial Revolution, there
was a lot of physical labour.
But, in the office of today, irrespective
of the domain you are working in, we are at
work in front of a computer, in an airconditioned
room..
What kind of fatigue could we have in that??
You might ask.
But, Mr. Michael Inzlicht, a researcher in
the University of Toronto, says fatigue is
actually coming from an evolutionary reaction.
Remember the Stone Age Man you were talking
about?
Yes, from the times of the Stone Age Man,
the body has been tuned to be aware that it
has other work to do.
“Are you hunting all the time?
Who will fetch the food and deliver it home?
Are you fiddling with fire all the time?
Who will hunt then?
Are you hunting all the time?
Who will take care of the children?
Who will protect your wife from being dragged
away by a competing alpha male?
Who will give birth to kids?”
There were conflicting needs on the human
body and the psyche.
And so, when you did something for too long,
it was the evolutionary trigger, .. perfected
over many thousands of years..
You need to be told “Hey, you have been
doing this for too long..
You have forgotten that other thing…”
— and, no disembodied spirit will do that
for you.
Instead, it will manifest itself as fatigue.
That was the root cause, the origin, of fatigue,
it seems.
What do I take away from this?
Well, monotony at the workplace.
Irrespective of the domain you are in, if
you continue doing the same thing over and
over again, with not much variety day to day,
hour to hour, burnout is imminent.
There has been much more research done on
this topic.
I did look around extensively on this matter.
They ask a question and answer it themselves,
in one of the research documents I encountered.
They ask, “What do you think leads to burnout?
Do you think it is physical effort?
Have you sweated it out, used up your muscles
much, tired yourselves out?
No!
That doesn’t lead to burnout.
In fact, like I just said, most work today
is NOT physical!
There are machines.
There are robots..
That do the job for you!
Is it mental strain?
Do we make the brain work too much?
Make it think too often?
They measured it, it seems..
How much energy, how many calories more does
a person who does a lot of numerical calculations,
lot of estimations, lot of gambling decisions
like in a business, how much more does this
person burn, versus this other person watching
Netflix, or chilling out in a beach..?
Believe it or not..
It is the energy equivalent of a peanut.
That is all!
The brain uses only the energy derived from
that of a single peanut, when calculating,
estimating, gambling, guessing..!
So, surely, mental strain may not be the reason.
Okay, .. is there a timeline fear?
Tension?
A sword dangling from above?
A clock ticking?
The fear and the need to finish something
by a set deadline?
Is that fear the reason?
Having to do something for too long, having
to finish something in a short while..?
Could that be the reason?
Nope.
Not that either.
After a lot of evaluation, a lot of research,
probably 15,000 people across various domains,
they did surveys, they did psychoanalyses,
and they have arrived at one overarching reason
why that could be the reason for burnout.
They have declared that this could be the
most important reason for burnout.
Guess what that is?
Observe that person.
That is it!
The feeling that you are not in control!
The agency..
the autonomy..
Irrespective of whether I am struggling or
enjoying, the ability to change that is in
my hands!
I am the one who brought this upon myself!
I can, with some effort, change the course
of things!
When you lack that sense of autonomy, they
say burnout sets in!
This lady has delivered an amazing TED Talk.
Gloria Chan is her name.
Beautiful TED Talk!
The talk’s title is “Work is not family”!
Many companies, I myself, we have committed
this sin!
When talking to our teammates, we exhort,
“Welcome to the Family!
We are all like close-knit family!”
we would drone on!
Yes, surely nice to hear.
Builds team spirit.
But, if overused…, if we use it in the wrong
places, inappropriately, it can lead to some
activities, some ways of thinking that will
spiral directly to burnout.
Do NOT say that, says Dr. Chan.
Just think about it, if you did a favour to
a family member, would you ask for money?
Would you get paid?
Would you even open the topic?
Would you let them talk?
Won’t you slap them immediately?
But, at the same time, if your CEO were paying
you your salary, how do you react?
Right there, don’t you see the differentiation…
Well, we talked about money.
I thought we should draw a few distinctions.
On one side, we have Time.
On the other side, we have Money.
How different are they?
How similar are they?
First, let us look at the definitions.
Time is the amount of hours you spend on a
job.
Money is the return-gift you get for having
spent the Time at the job.
Can you replenish it?
If you lose money, you can gain it..
In fact, sometimes, you lose money to gain
more money!
Principal.
Seed money!
But, when you lose time, you don’t gain
it back, do you?
What is the Value of Time?
The Value of Past Time is Zero.
Only Future Time has any Value at all!
If we don’t use the Present Time well, it
too will become Past Time.
Money?
Over time, it actually reduces in Value.
They call it the Time Value of Money.
If you have hundred rupees today…, you can
actually equate it to two hundred rupees tomorrow.
Even if you give me ten thousand rupees five
days from now, I may be able to do more with
the hundred rupees you give me right now!
It is all in the hands of the person who uses
the money!
That is Value!
What about Earnability?
You can earn money.
You can put some effort, earn money, give
time, earn money!
Can you give money and get time?
Very hard.
In fact, it is nearly impossible to procure
Real Time back in your hands.
What about the Spending Pattern?
Whatever you are doing or not doing, you are
spending time.
You have spent ten minutes of your time.
Thank you for it..
Watching this video.
You are not going to get it back.
But, Money?
I can choose to not spend it.
You can change the Spend Pattern.
Spend more later, spend lesser now..!
Storability?
Let us preserve some of it now, let us use
it up later…
You can do that with Money, can you do that
with Time?
Just running past you…
We saw so many comparisons.
Did it ring a bell?
Did it wake you up to a grim reality?
What is more valuable?
Time or Money?
And, all the time, what are we doing, at work?
Giving Time..
Taking Money..
Do you see the paradox there?
The irony?
In literature, in English literature, there
are proverbs like these!
“Better to light one candle than to curse
the darkness.”
Talking about the same candle, there is another
proverb like this.
“A candle loses nothing by lighting another
candle”!
Can you tell which candle lit the other two?
No way!
They are all burning beautifully together..
If you spend some more time thinking about
this candle, you will encounter another phrase.
“Burning the midnight oil”.
In the olden days, when the sun is down, people
burned the midnight oil, whenever they had
to overwork.
But, wait, there is an even worse case.
If you thought burning the midnight oil signified
burnout, you will need to meet this phrase
in English: “Burning the candle on both
ends!”
Imagine lighting a candle on both ends.
You are allowing yourself to be consumed at
great speed.
Burning the candle on both ends.
Is this efficient?
How will they even hold on to it?
Is this giving the correct amount of light?
Or, is some illumination lost because two
light sources are so close to each other?
One’s light being wasted on the other, and
so on..
Has somebody performed any experiments, I
wondered.
Yes!
Lo and behold!
There is a physics experiment that actually
derives something very interesting!
A physics professor lights both ends of a
candle, and demonstrates practically, about
the effects of Newton’s Laws and Angular
Momentum!
But, unwittingly, it is teaching us a lot
more too!
There is a bigger lesson.
Listen!
“The experiment is ready to go!
The experiment teaches us about combustion,
and Newton’s Third Law of Motion.
A candle that is balanced between two glasses
will rock or seesaw up and down on its own!
If one end of the candle burns more quickly
than the other, the lighter side of the candle
moves up, the lower side of the candle will
angle such that the flame melts the wax, causing
it to drip down…
We are starting to see the wax starting to
drip.. and we are starting to get a little
bit more of a rocking motion here.. the weight
is altered as the wax drips.. one or two drops
on the left, and a whole bunch drips on the
right, and that is what gets your weight transferred,
the mass going back and forth, and getting
that seesaw action!
Try different candles, peel off the other
end to get to the wick, make sure you don’t
peel off too much, you want to have that weight
so you can see it rock…
That last little piece right there… is pretty
cool!”
Seesaw!
When I saw this, instantly, the philosophy
from that stuck out.
You cannot balance..!
When people are talking about the impossibility
of the Work Life Balance, how are we going
to balance Work 1 and Work 2?
No way!
The burning of the candle on both ends, is
NOT a sustainable activity!
Please realise!
We thought, in the times of Covid, this is
amazing for introverts!
All I had to do was face a computer, sit at
home, nobody to disturb me, nobody to ask
me to speak up, we thought.
But Covid time, lockdown time, and work from
home time, that is so prevalent these days,
is hard even for an introvert.
That “Always on Record Mode”, “Always
on Presentation Mode”, “I am being put
on show” is really damaging to the psyche.
And, when you look at them as individual little
boxes, so much of them is hidden from view,
their nonverbal cues, their body language,
is hidden, and we are not able to guess what
their reactions actually are.
And so, Morra Aarons, she is also a TED Speaker,
she says, create an office space at home!
Even if you remodel your home, if you are
doing two works in the same place, if you
are working from the kitchen as well as cooking
in the kitchen, learn to create the environment.
She also says, you need personal space.
Once in a while, have a routine, a ritual,
where you put an invisible tent around yourself:
husband, wife, child, boss, team member..
No, My personal space!
Also she recommends that we should try to
manage the room.
In a real room, if a person is too talkative,
we ask them to take a pause, and let the other
people speak.
Similarly, we should do the same in an online
room too.
You should take the additional responsibility…
each person..
To silence the talkative people, let the others
speak up..
Everybody must be given that opportunity,
she says.
And, also, instead of saying you would do
everything only via audio / video, go for
asynchronous!
Can I record a video and send you a message?
Can I send it as a typed email?
They were golden!
They have been around for forty-five years
now!
Try those asynchronous modes of communication,
she says!
I saw this book recently.
The title sounded so interesting..
Oh, before that, the author’s name sounded
so interesting!
Om Swami!
I am going to read this book and find out
what it is all about.
But, look at the title.
Mind Full to Mindful!
“Embrace the present moment” is an advice,
a golden piece of wisdom given to us by almost
every Wise Sage.
We are full of the Past and the Future.
We forget the Present.
That mindfulness practice too, is useful to
reduce burnout, I think.
I had a friend.
A colleague.
Girish is his name.
He is not with us now, but he left behind
a very interesting thought..
We were having a conversation, and he said,
“I wish…” and that still remains in
my mind as if it was yesterday.
“Do you know how a company should operate?”,
he began.
“We need to enforce two rules.
The first rule is everybody should be forced
to take a vacation.
You HAVE to.
Lock your computer up, deactivate your account..
Go!
And, the second rule is even more powerful.
The second rule, it comes with an expiry date,
your salary.
If you are given some amount of money, you
need to spend it off!
You keep saving it for the future, you stop
being considerate of the Present, you struggle,
you sacrifice, all in the hope of some distant
future probability.”
Such were his rules!
Sounded interesting!
I don’t know where he is now, but beautiful
suggestions!
When I make a video, I make a thumbnail too,
you know that by now.
This is how I started it.
But, I changed it to something like this.
Do you see the difference?
In the one above, you are ABLE to see the
difference.
It is getting warmer!
But, here, it is a gradient!
And, that is the problem with burnout!
When it starts hitting you, you don’t realise
until it is too late.
I hope it doesn’t happen to you and me.
You should keep looking for those early warnings.
Looking for those early warnings?
How?!
Do you remember this speedometer?
While driving a car?
You get a green zone too, if you drive in
that green zone, you will be able to save
much, you are told.
The problem is you can only go faster and
faster and faster… but you are sacrificing
something else.
As you go faster and faster, yes, there is
a trip meter.
How much farther you can go, how far you have
come… that meter that shows that data.
Every car driver knows, he sacrifices, she
sacrifices, the duration for which they can
keep on driving when they go beyond a particular
speed limit.
You sacrifice distance for speed.
Oh.. there is a big daddy meter above, that
is even more important!
Lifetime distance driven!
Do you want to go far?
Or do you want to go fast?
That is the Closing Thought!
I heard that it is an African proverb, but
not really from Africa!
“If you want to go fast, go alone.
If you want to go far, go together!”
So, probably, the best cure for burnout, is
that togetherness!
Get a partner.
Get a husband.
Get a wife.
Get a manager.
Get a friend.
Get a colleague.
Share.
Probably they are waiting for
you to ask!
Avoid burnout.
Thank you!